feat: unify API Auth docs (Admin, Camunda 8, and Web Modeler APIs) (#4078)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/apis-tools/camunda-api-rest/camunda-api-rest-authentication.md

description: "Step through authentication options that can be used to access Camunda 8 REST API."
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

All Camunda 8 REST API requests require authentication. To authenticate, generate a JWT token depending on your environment and pass it in each request.

## Generating a token

<Tabs groupId="authentication" defaultValue="saas" queryString values={
[
{label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas' },
{label: 'Self-Managed', value: 'self-managed' },
]}>

<TabItem value='saas'>

> 1. Create client credentials by clicking **Console > Organization > Administration API > Create new credentials**.

Author: ```suggestion
1. [Create client credentials](/guides/setup-client-connection-credentials.md) in the **Clusters > Cluster name > API** tab of [Camunda Console](https://console.camunda.io/).
```

   ```shell
   curl --location --request POST 'http://localhost:18080/auth/realms/camunda-platform/protocol/openid-connect/token' \
   --header 'Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
   --data-urlencode "client_id=${CLIENT_ID}" \
   --data-urlencode "client_secret=${CLIENT_SECRET}" \
   --data-urlencode 'grant_type=client_credentials'
   ```
5. A successful authentication response looks like the following:
   ```json
   {
     "access_token": "<TOKEN>",
     "expires_in": 300,
     "refresh_expires_in": 0,
     "token_type": "Bearer",
     "not-before-policy": 0
   }
   ```
6. Capture the value of the `access_token` property and store it as your token.

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Using a token

Send the captured token as an authorization header in each request: `Authorization: Bearer <TOKEN>`.

For example, to call the Camunda 8 REST API's `/topology` endpoint, use the following command depending on your environment:

<Tabs groupId="using-a-token" defaultValue="saas" queryString values={
[
{label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas' },
{label: 'Self-Managed', value: 'self-managed' },
]}>

<TabItem value='saas'>

:::tip

> The URL of the Camunda 8 REST API, represented below by the `${ZEEBE_REST_ADDRESS}` variable, can be captured when creating an API client. It can also be constructed as `https://${REGION}.zeebe.camunda.io:443/${CLUSTER_ID}/`.

Author: ```suggestion
The URL of the Camunda 8 REST API, represented below by the `${ZEEBE_REST_ADDRESS}` variable, can be captured when creating an API client. It can also be constructed as `https://${REGION}.zeebe.camunda.io/${CLUSTER_ID}/`.
```

Oops

:::

</TabItem>

<TabItem value='self-managed'>

:::tip
The URL of the Camunda 8 REST API, represented below by the `${ZEEBE_REST_ADDRESS}` variable, is configured in your Self-Managed installation. The default value is `http://localhost:8080/`.
:::

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

```shell
curl --header "Authorization: Bearer ${TOKEN}" \
     ${ZEEBE_REST_ADDRESS}/v2/topology
```

A successful response would include [information about the cluster](/apis-tools/camunda-api-rest/specifications/get-cluster-topology.api.mdx). For example:

```json
{
  "brokers": [
    ...
  ],
  "clusterSize": 3,
  "partitionsCount": 3,
  "replicationFactor": 3,

>   "gatewayVersion": "8.6.0"

Reviewer: Idea - Could be fancy here and get a variable for the product version 🤷‍♀️

Author: yeah, in general I didn't feel great about these sample API responses. I want to show enough that it's useful, but not so much that people get lost in the details or it's drifting from the real response.
